Appendix 8 – Civil Aviation Order 20.9

Civil Aviation Order 20.9 (as amended)
made under subregulation 235 (7) of the Civil Aviation Regulations 1988.
This compilation was prepared on 11 November 2011 taking into account
amendments up to Civil Aviation Order 20.9 Amendment Instrument 2011 (No. 2).
Prepared by the Legislative Drafting Branch, Legal Services Division, Civil Aviation
Safety Authority, Canberra.

Contents
Section 20.9 (Air service operations — precautions in refuelling,
engine and ground radar operations)
Page
2 ....... Application ....................................................................................................................... 1
3 ....... Fuel and oils ..................................................................................................................... 2
4 ....... Fuelling of aircraft ............................................................................................................ 2
5 ....... Starting and ground operations of engines ...................................................................... 7
6 ....... Ground operation of aircraft radar equipment ................................................................. 8
Appendix I ...................................................................................................................... 10
Notes to Civil Aviation Order 20.9 .................................................................................. 13

Section 20.9
Air service operations — precautions in refuelling, engine and ground
radar operations
2
2.1

2.2

Application
Subject to paragraph 2.2, this section applies to:
(a) all Australian aircraft operating on aerodromes in Australian territory;
and
(b) as far as practicable — all Australian aircraft operating outside Australian
territory.
This section does not apply to an aircraft that is being refuelled in accordance
with:
(a) section 20.10, except as set out in subparagraph 1A.1 (a) of section 20.10;
and
(b) section 20.10.1, except as set out in subparagraph 2.2 (a) of section
20.10.1.

1
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9

3

Fuel and oils
3.1

The pilot in command of an aircraft shall ensure that the aircraft is not flown
unless the aviation fuel, aircraft engine lubricating oil, aircraft engine power
augmentation fluid and aircraft hydraulic system fluid used in connection with
the servicing or operation of the aircraft complies with the specification and
grade required or approved for the purpose by CASA.
Note 1 In respect of aircraft engine power augmentation fluid and aircraft hydraulic system
fluid the specification and grade specified for a particular purpose in a manual or manuals
promulgated by the aircraft or aircraft engine manufacturer may be considered as having been
approved by CASA.
Note 2 The pilot in command may assume that:
(a) aviation fuel; and
(b) aircraft engine lubricating oil; and
(c) aircraft engine power augmentation fluid; and
(d) aircraft hydraulic system fluid in the aircraft, other than that which he has caused to be
delivered into the aircraft, complies with the required specification and grade.

3.3

All ground fuel stock shall be carefully checked for the presence of
undissolved water before the fuelling operation is commenced.
Note 1 This precaution is particularly important when handling fuel from drum stocks.
Note 2 Attention is drawn to the necessity of using a positive method, such as suitable
water-detecting paste or paper, in testing for the presence of free water since sensory
perceptions of colour and smell, if used alone, can be quite misleading.
Note 3 In the case of turbine fuels, attention is also drawn to the necessity of watching for
signs of cloudiness or other indication of the presence of suspended water droplets which will
not necessarily be detected by the means mentioned in Note 2.

3.4

All fuel shall be strained or filtered for the removal of free or suspended water
and other contaminating matter before entering the aircraft tanks.
Note Attention is drawn to the special standards of filtration which may be specified by the
manufacturers of certain types of engines. e.g. turbine engines and direct-injection piston
engines.

4
4.1
4.1.1

Fuelling of aircraft
Location of aircraft
During fuelling operations, the aircraft and ground fuelling equipment shall be
so located that no fuel tank filling points or vent outlets lie:
(a) within 5 metres (17 ft) of any sealed building; and
(b) within 6 metres (20 ft) of other stationary aircraft; and
(c) within 15 metres (50 ft) of any exposed public area; and
(d) within 15 metres (50 ft) of any unsealed building in the case of aircraft
with a maximum take-off weight in excess of 5 700 kg (12 566 lb) and
(e) within 9 metres (30 ft) of any unsealed building in the case of aircraft
with a maximum take-off weight not exceeding 5 700 kg (12 566 lb).

2
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
4.1.1.1

4.1.1.2

4.1.2

Notwithstanding the contents of paragraph 4.1.1 limited fuelling operations
for maintenance purposes may be carried out in certain hangars under the
following conditions:
(a) refuelling or defuelling of gasoline or wide-cut gasoline type turbine fuel
is not permitted;
(b) overwing fuelling is not permitted;
(c) these operations shall not be permitted in hangars occupied by 2 or more
tenants;
(d) the operator shall obtain approval from CASA for the detailed procedures
under which these operations may be performed. These procedures shall
be described in the maintenance manual and shall include the
circumstances under which refuelling or defuelling in hangars or
maintenance area is permitted, and the maximum volume of fuel
involved.
For the purpose of this Order, a sealed building is one which all the external
part within 15 metres (50 ft) of an aircraft‟s fuel tank filling points or vent
outlets or ground fuelling equipment is of non-flammable materials and has no
openings or all openings are closed.
Where the fuelling equipment is not mobile, the aircraft shall be so placed that
it can be rapidly moved to a place of safety, and a means of ensuring that this
can be done shall be readily available.
Note The following operations are not deemed to constitute fuelling operations:
(a) the drainage of a small quantity of fuel from a fuel system drain point;
(b) the transfer of fuel from tank to tank within an aircraft making use exclusively of lines
and equipment permanently installed in the aircraft.

4.2
4.2.1
4.2.2

Fuelling with passengers on board
The operator of an aircraft must ensure that avgas is not loaded onto an
aircraft while passengers are on board, or entering or leaving, the aircraft.
The operator of an aircraft that has an underwing fuelling system must ensure
that fuel is not loaded onto the aircraft using this system while passengers are
on board, or entering or leaving, the aircraft unless the fuel is aviation grade
turbine fuel that contains anti-static additive or is loaded in the USA and
meets the ASTM D 1655 standard and the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) before the fuel is loaded, all persons who may be on board, or entering or
leaving, the aircraft while the fuel is loaded are told that:
(i) fuel is to be loaded; and
(ii) their seat-belts must not be fastened while the fuel is loaded; and
(iii) they must not smoke, use any electrical equipment (other than
medical equipment used for treating a patient, the operation of which
will not affect the safety of any person on board the aircraft) or do
anything else that might cause fuel vapours to ignite during the
loading;
(b) all persons on board, or entering or leaving, the aircraft obey the
instructions given under sub-subparagraphs (a) (ii) and (iii);

3
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
(c) a cabin crew or flight crew member is appointed to perform the following
tasks while the fuel is loaded:
(i) ensure the safety of the passengers;
(ii) maintain discipline inside the aircraft;
(iii) supervise any necessary evacuation of the aircraft;
(d) while the fuel is loaded:
(i) the aircraft‟s “fasten seat belt” signs are turned off; and
(ii) the aircraft‟s “no smoking” signs are turned on; and
(iii) the aircraft‟s emergency lights (if any) are armed;
(e) while the fuel is loaded, there is at least 1 cabin crew or flight crew
member on duty in the aircraft:
(i) for every 72 passengers on board the aircraft; or
(ii) for every passenger zone in the aircraft in which there are passengers;
whichever is more;
(f) while the fuel is loaded, there is at least 1 cabin crew or flight crew
member on duty by at least 1 exit door of each of the aircraft‟s passenger
zones in which there are passengers;
(g) all cabin crew or flight crew members who are on duty in the aircraft
while the fuel is loaded:
(i) are prepared for an immediate evacuation; and
(ii) supervise the passengers during the loading; and
(iii) ensure that the aisles and exits are unobstructed during the loading;
(h) the areas outside the aircraft that would be used if the aircraft were
evacuated are kept clear while the fuel is loaded;
(k) if the aircraft‟s engine is running — a member of the aircraft‟s flight crew
is on duty on its flight deck;
(l) the operator‟s operations manual sets out:
(i) the responsibilities of members of the operating crew who are on duty
in the aircraft while fuel is loaded; and
(ii) procedures for complying with the requirements of this paragraph.
Note An underwing fuelling system is any system that forms part of the aircraft and that
allows delivery of fuel to the aircraft without exposing the fuel to the atmosphere during
delivery.

4.2.3

4.2.4

Subject to paragraph 4.2.4, the operator of an aircraft without an underwing
fuelling system must ensure that fuel is not loaded on to the aircraft while
passengers are on board, or entering or leaving, the aircraft.
The operator of an aircraft that cannot be underwing fuelled may allow fuel to
be loaded onto the aircraft while a passenger is on board if:
(a) the passenger‟s medical condition is such that he or she cannot leave the
aircraft without assistance; and
(b) the aircraft‟s cabin door is open; and
(c) the equipment used for loading or unloading passengers (if any) is in
position at the door; and
(d) the requirements and conditions set out in paragraph 4.2.2 are satisfied.

4
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
4.2.5

If:
(a) fuel is being loaded onto an aircraft in accordance with paragraph 4.2.2 or
4.2.4; and
(b) either:
(i) fuel vapour is found inside the aircraft; or
(ii) for any other reason it is not safe to continue loading the fuel;
the aircraft‟s operator must ensure that the loading of the fuel stops
immediately.

4.3
4.3.1

Aircraft safety precautions during fuelling operations
All engines in the aircraft, including any auxiliary power units, must be shut
down, except where CASA is satisfied that the operation of such an engine or
auxiliary power unit will not present a hazard and where a statement to that
effect, together with any special conditions for operation, is included in the
operator‟s operations manual if such a manual is required.
Note For this paragraph, CASA is satisfied if the aircraft flight manual permits operation of such an
engine or auxiliary power unit.

4.3.2

4.3.3

4.3.4

When an external electrical supply is used, the connections between that
supply and the aircraft electrical system shall be made and securely locked
before the fuelling operation is connected and shall not be disconnected until
the operation has been completed, except that connectors, which provide
control to ensure effective engagement before external power can be supplied
to the aircraft, need not be locked.
A person shall not, and the pilot in command and the operator shall take
reasonable steps to ensure that a person does not, during fuelling operations:
(a) operate or perform maintenance work on the aircraft‟s radar equipment
except that where the fuel is kerosene, operation or maintenance may be
carried out provided the radar transmitter is de-activated; or
(b) except where the fuel involved is kerosene, carry out maintenance on any
electrical, electronic or radio systems within the aircraft or operate such
equipment other than the aircraft‟s interior lighting or electrical apparatus
necessary for the fuelling process.
For fuelling an aircraft, the following requirements apply:
(a) before a fuel tank cap is removed, the aircraft and all fuelling equipment
must be bonded;
(b) if bonding is lost, fuel transfer must be stopped immediately and not
resumed until the bond is restored.
Note Care must be taken before reconnecting the bonding wire to allow for dissipation of
static electricity that may have built up.

4.3.4A

For paragraph 4.3.4:
bonded means the aircraft and the fuelling equipment have the same electrical
potential.
fuelling includes refuelling and defuelling.
fuelling equipment includes mobile fuel tankers, in-ground refuel ports, fuel
bowsers, hand pumps, drums, funnels and other loose items of equipment if
these are used in the fuelling operation.

5
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
4.3.5

4.3.6

4.3.7

4.3.8

4.4
4.4.1

4.4.2
4.4.3

4.4.4

4.4.5

4.4.6

All footwear worn by aircraft servicing personnel and persons operating
fuelling equipment shall be of a non-sparking type and such persons shall not
carry any matches, cigarette lighters or other objects which could represent an
ignition hazard.
Except where automatic shut-off devices limit the capacity of an aircraft fuel
tank, the operator and the pilot in command shall ensure that sufficient
airspace remains in each fuel tank to allow for anticipated fuel expansion.
When a fuelling operation on an aircraft has been completed, the pilot in
command and the operator of the aircraft shall ensure that all fuel and oil tank
caps are securely refitted.
Aircraft oil tanks shall not be drained or filled when the aircraft is inside a
hangar or other building unless the oiling equipment used complies with the
provisions of Appendix I to this Order.
Safety precautions external to an aircraft during fuelling operations
The area in which fuelling operations are carried out shall be clearly placarded
as a „No Smoking‟ area and the limits of this area shall be a sealed building or
at least 15 metres (50 ft) from the aircraft or ground fuelling equipment.
Where mobile fuelling equipment is used, the equipment shall be so placed
that it can be rapidly moved in the event of fire.
A person shall not, and the pilot in command and the operator shall take
reasonable steps to ensure that a person does not, during fuelling operations:
(a) smoke or use a naked flame within 15 metres (50 ft) of the aircraft and
ground fuelling equipment; or
(b) except in the case of aircraft, operate an internal combustion engine or
any electrical switch, battery, generator, motor or other electrical
apparatus within 15 metres (50 ft) of the aircraft‟s fuel tank filling points
or vent outlets, and ground fuelling equipment unless the engine, switch,
generator, motor or apparatus complies with the provisions of Appendix I
to this Order and has been inspected.
At least 2 fire extinguishers of approved type and capacity must be positioned:
(a) within 15 metres, but not less than 6 metres, from the aircraft and the
fuelling equipment; or
(b) carried on the fuelling equipment.
If the fire extinguishers are carried on the fuelling equipment, they must:
(a) be fitted with quick release brackets; and
(b) be readily available from either side of the equipment; and
(c) be located as far as practicable from the vehicle fuel tanks and fuelling
points.
For paragraph 4.4.4 and 4.4.5, the fire extinguishers may be:
(a) 60B dry powder fire extinguishers; or
(b) an 80B dry powder fire extinguisher and a 20B foam extinguisher; or
(c) other fire extinguishers approved by CASA.
Note The use of 2 carbon dioxide extinguishers, each with a minimum capacity of 4.5 kg
(10 lb), is acceptable for this purpose. Extinguishers of other types and capacities may be
approved on application to CASA.

6
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
4.5
4.5.1

4.5.2
4.5.3

4.7

5

Action in the event of a fire hazard
A fuelling operation shall be suspended and the Airport Fire Service notified
when any fuel of a quantity likely to create a fire hazard is spilled on or within
15 metres (50 feet) of the aircraft or ground fuelling equipment, including the
bilge of a fuelling barge, and the operation shall not recommence until the fire
hazard is removed.
A fuelling operation shall be stopped as soon as it becomes apparent that an
infringement exists of any of the relevant requirements of this Order.
When any fuel of a quantity likely to create a fire hazard is spilled on or
within 15 metres (50 ft) of the aircraft or ground fuelling equipment, the pilot
in command or, in his absence, the operator shall ensure that:
(a) passengers remaining on board or in the process of embarking or
disembarking are removed to a point at least 15 metres (50 ft) from the
spilled fuel; and
(b) mobile power units, vehicles and power operated loading devices
operating within 15 metres (50 ft) of the spilled fuel are shut down; and
(c) maintenance work of any nature on or within the aircraft is suspended and
not recommenced until the spilled fuel has been removed.
In this subsection:
cabin crew member means a person who:
(a) is a member of the operating crew, but not the flight crew, of an aircraft;
and
(b) may be assigned to emergency duties in the aircraft under subsection 12
of section 20.11 of the Civil Aviation Orders.
passenger zone in relation to an aircraft, means an area within the aircraft
which has:
(a) seats for 72 or less passengers; and
(b) an exit.

Starting and ground operations of engines
5.1

5.1.1

5.1.2

5.1.3

5.1.4

The pilot in command or in his absence any other person responsible for
starting or ground operation of an aircraft shall ensure that:
In the case of land aircraft, passenger loading equipment to permit rapid
evacuation of passengers and crew is kept immediately available during the
starting of engines.
In the case of seaplanes, water transport of a capacity sufficient to enable rapid
evacuation of passengers and crew is immediately available during the starting
of engines.
Where any fuel or other flammable material is spilled within 15 metres (50 ft)
of an aircraft, the aircraft engines shall not be started or operated until the fire
hazard has been removed.
An aircraft engine shall not be started or operated:
(a) within 5 metres (17 ft) of any sealed building; or
(b) within 8 metres (25 ft) of other aircraft; or

7
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
(c) within 15 metres (50 ft) of any exposed public area; or
(d) within 15 metres (50 ft) of any unsealed building in the case of an aircraft
with a maximum take-off weight exceeding 5 700 kg (12 566 lb); or
(e) within 8 metres (25 ft) of any unsealed building in the case of an aircraft
with a maximum take-off weight not exceeding 5 700 kg (12 566 lb);
and turbine engines, in addition, shall not be operated within the appropriate
distance specified below of any other aircraft, fuelling equipment or exposed
public areas which lie to the rear of and within a 15 degree arc either side of
the exhaust outlet axis of that engine:
Engine type

Power condition

Minimum distance
metres

Turbo-prop

At or below normal slow taxiing
power
At power used to initiate
movement of a stationary aircraft
At or below normal slow taxiing
thrust
At thrust used to initiate
movement of a stationary aircraft

15 (50 ft)

Turbo-jet

23 (75 ft)
30 (100 ft)
46 (150 ft)

Note Fuelling equipment does not include equipment and outlet points of an installation
located below ground level when the equipment is stowed and covering hatches are in place.

5.2

5.3

6

The operator of an aircraft shall ensure that all persons who may be required
to start the engine of the aircraft are familiar with the method of operation of
any installed engine nacelle fire extinguishing equipment.
The pilot in command and the operator shall ensure that passengers do not
embark or disembark or that freight is not loaded or unloaded from the aircraft
whilst an engine of the aircraft is operating unless the passengers and/or the
loading personnel have been given instruction and guidance to protect them
from injury as a consequence of engine operation.

Ground operation of aircraft radar equipment
6.1
6.2

6.2.1

The requirement of this subsection shall apply to all radar equipment with a
nominal peak power output rating in excess of 25 kW.
During all ground operation, including testing and maintenance of aircraft
radar equipment, the operator and person in charge of such equipment shall
ensure that:
The equipment is not energised in its normal mode (antenna rotating) unless
the sector area scanned by the radar beam is clear of the following objects to a
distance of 37 metres (120 ft) from the antenna:
(a) aircraft being refuelled or defuelled;
(b) fuel tankers, fuel tanks or fuel storage areas;
(c) persons or cargo;
(d) any other aircraft or aircraft hangar.

8
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
Note For each radar installation the sector area should be defined in terms of readily
distinguishable dimensions preferably related to some feature of the aircraft and should appear
in the Aircraft Maintenance Manual.

6.2.2

6.2.3

6.2.4

6.2.5

The equipment is not energised with the antenna stationary and the beam
directed towards any of the objects specified in paragraph 6.2.1 unless the
distance separating them from the antenna is in excess of 60 metres (200 ft).
The distance specified in paragraphs 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 may be reduced by
75 per cent when an approved beam attenuating device is used between the
antenna and any object specified in paragraph 6.2.1.
The equipment is not energised in any radiating mode of operation when the
aircraft in which the equipment is fitted is in a hangar or other enclosure
unless a suitable microwave energy absorbing shield is fitted over the antenna.
The equipment is not to be operated in any aircraft which is being refuelled or
defuelled.
Note During all testing of aircraft radar equipment the beam should, whenever possible, be
directed with maximum upward tilt toward a clear area.

9
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
Appendix I
Fire safety requirements to be met by mechanical and electrical
equipment within 15 metres (50 ft) of an aircraft's fuel tank filling points
and vent outlets during fuelling operations
1
1.1

1.2
2

Application
The requirements of this Appendix are applicable to all mechanical and
electrical equipment used within 15 metres (50 ft) of an aircraft‟s fuel tank
filling points and vent outlets during fuelling operations.
Compliance with these requirements is the responsibility of the operator of the
equipment.
Vehicles and plant
Note Because a higher standard of safety can be more readily achieved on diesel engines
than petrol engines, it is recommended that diesel engines be used on all vehicles, pumping
plants, etc., used within 15 metres (50 ft) of an aircraft‟s fuel tank filling points and outlet
vents during fuelling operations.

2.1

2.2

All equipment shall be of good automotive design, and shall receive proper
maintenance to ensure that it is kept in good state of repair. All reasonable
means shall be taken to limit the hazard from fire. Particular attention shall be
given to possible sources of ignition such as:
(a) incandescent carbon or naked flame which could be emitted from the
engine or associated equipment; and
(b) arcing between metallic parts of electrical circuits and components
caused by:
(i) operation of switch contacts; and
(ii) faulty cable terminations; and
(iii) breakdown of electrical insulation; and
(iv) moving contacts or rotary electrical equipment; and
(v) accidental short circuiting or open circuiting; and
(c) exposure of hot parts to combustible matter; and
(d) overheating of working parts to the ignition temperature of any
combustible matter in the vicinity of the engines.
Parts of the equipment requiring attention are:
(a) fuel system; and
(b) exhaust system; and
(c) electrical system.

2.2.1 Fuel system
The carburettor air intake shall be fitted with a flame arrestor, such as a
backfire non-return valve, or an efficient baffled and screened air cleaner.
The fuel tank shall be securely mounted, and the tank and its filler shall be
positioned so that fuel cannot be inadvertently spilled on the engine, its
exhaust, electrical and ignition system.
Fuel tank filling openings shall be fitted with well fitting caps.

10
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall comply with Australian Standard 1425
and Australian Standard CB20, but excess flow valves and non-return valves
shall be fitted irrespective of size of tank.
2.2.2 Exhaust System
The exhaust system shall be provided with means to prevent hazardous
emission of incandescent carbon or naked flame. Baffled standard vehicle
mufflers, of good automotive design, and in good condition are acceptable.
2.2.3 Electrical System
Standard vehicle wiring shall be maintained in good condition. All additional
equipment such as obstruction lights, shall have wires and cables well
supported, with insulating grommets fitted wherever they pass through metal
panels. Equipment shall be suitably insulated and mechanically protected to
prevent breakdown during use.
Batteries shall be suitably covered to prevent accidental shorting of cells and
shall be provided with adequate means of natural ventilation.
3

Fuelling vehicles and plant
Aircraft fuelling vehicles and plant shall comply with the following:
(a) be fitted with an isolation switch between the battery and electrical
services;
(b) the engine exhaust outlet to be remote from the fuelling equipment;
(c) all electrical wiring to the rear of the vehicle cab shall be mechanically
protected;
(d) exposed electrical terminals shall be protected by insulating boots or
covers;
(e) generators, motors, switches and relays shall be of a type which will
prevent emission of hazardous sparks.

4

Electrical equipment
4.1 Equipment above ground level
All fixed and portable electrical equipment (other than vehicular) shall be of
the same requirements as the SAA requirements as for equipment operated in
Class 1, Division 2 locations, as specified in the SAA Wiring Rules, Part 1,
except that arc-producing devices such as switches, contactors, etc., which are
not operated during fuelling or defuelling operations need not to conform to
the requirements for this class of equipment. The controls of all arc-producing
devices which do not meet the requirements for Class 1, Division 2 locations
shall be clearly labelled so that there is no doubt that they are not to be
operated during fuelling operations.
4.2 Equipment below ground level
Electrical equipment located below the general ground level of the apron
(such as apron power outlets, pump control switches, etc.) shall comply with
the SAA requirements for equipment operated in Class 1, Division 1 locations.

11
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9
4.3 Cables
(a) All cables carrying electrical current at potentials up to 250 volts with
respect to earth shall be required to have 250 volt grade insulation and
shall be protected by a plastic sheath resistant to attack by fuel and oil.
(b) All cables situated in areas traversed by vehicles, hand-carts and the like
shall be suitably protected against mechanical damage. In no case shall
this protection be of a lower standard than that provided by hardwood
troughing with the dimensions by 2W and 3D where W and D are
respectively width and depth of the cable space where W is not less than
D.
(c) Where the use of trailing cables is permitted as a temporary measure, The
appropriate placement of wooden or other suitable portable barriers may
be used as an alternative to wooden troughing described in paragraph
4.3 (b) to guard against damage by vehicles and to ensure the safety of
pedestrians.
4.4 Protective devices
All fuses and overload protective devices shall be hermetically sealed and
protected by a general purpose enclosure.
4.5 Batteries
All batteries shall be suitably covered to prevent accidental shorting of cells
and shall be provided with adequate means of natural ventilation.
4.6 Protection from breakdown in service
(a) All electrical equipment shall be suitably insulated and mechanically
protected to prevent breakdown whilst in use.
(b) All connections shall be secured with spring or lock washers to prevent
accidental loosening of connections whilst in use.

12
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

Civil Aviation Order 20.9

Notes to Civil Aviation Order 20.9
Note 1
The Civil Aviation Order (in force under the Civil Aviation Regulations 1988) as shown in this
compilation comprises Civil Aviation Order 20.9 amended as indicated in the Tables below.
Table of Orders
Year and
number

Date of notification
in Gazette/
registration on FRLI

Date of
commencement

CAO 2004 No.
R10
CAO 20.9 2005
No. 1

8 December 2004 (see
F2005B00787)
FRLI 6 January 2006 (see
F2006L00094)

8 December 2004
(see s. 2)
7 January 2006 (see
s. 2)

CAO 20.9 2010
No. 1

FRLI 2 March 2010 (see
F2010L00542)

3 March 2010 (see
s. 2)

CAO 20.9 2011
No. 1

FRLI 15 July 2011 (see
F2011L01503)

16 July 2011 (see
s. 2)

CAO 20.9 2011
No. 2

FRLI 9 November 2011 (see
F2011L02289)

10 November 2011
(see s. 2)

Application,
saving or
transitional
provisions

Table of Amendments
ad. = added or inserted

am. = amended

rep.= repealed

rs. = repealed and substituted

Provision affected

How affected

s. 20.9

rs. 2004 No. R10

subs. 3

am. CAO 20.9 2011 No. 2

subs. 4

am. CAO 20.09 2005 No. 1; CAO 20.9 2010 No. 1;
CAO 20.9 2011 No. 1

13
Federal Register of Legislative Instruments F2011C00881

